Init rfc for piped plugin arch (#5285)
pipe-cd/pipecd: docs/rfcs/0015-pipecd-plugin-arch-meta.md

- Start Date: 2024-10-01
- Target Version: 1.0

# Summary

This can be consider as the biggest step forward to make PipeCD fit its vision: The one CD for all.

# Motivation

> Up to this time, PipeCD archived serveral goals as its defined design in the initial stage, which included "bing a consistent interface which can be used to make progressive delivery process easy for many application platforms". As its goal, the PipeCD currently supports 5 kind of application platforms, which are Kubernetes, ECS, Terraform, Lambda, and Cloud Run. But we want it not just like that, we want to make PipeCD support progressive delivery for whatever application platforms the market use today.

Reviewer: [nit] typo (in some sentences)

serveral ->  several

> Up to this time, PipeCD archived serveral goals as its defined design in the initial stage, which included "bing a consistent interface which can be used to make progressive delivery process easy for many application platforms". As its goal, the PipeCD currently supports 5 kind of application platforms, which are Kubernetes, ECS, Terraform, Lambda, and Cloud Run. But we want it not just like that, we want to make PipeCD support progressive delivery for whatever application platforms the market use today.

Reviewer: [nit]

'serveral' exists in some sentences.

```suggestion
Up to this time, PipeCD archived several goals as its defined design in the initial stage, which included "being a consistent interface which can be used to make progressive delivery process easy for many application platforms". As its goal, the PipeCD currently supports 5 kind of application platforms, which are Kubernetes, ECS, Terraform, Lambda, and Cloud Run. But we want it not just like that, we want to make PipeCD support progressive delivery for whatever application platforms the market use today.
```

> To archive that goal, there is only one way, which is enable the PipeCD accept new platforms as plugin of the piped agent, which can free the limit of what platform PipeCD could support as a CD system.

Reviewer: [nit] 
```suggestion
To achieve that goal, there is only one way, which enables PipeCD to accept new platforms as plugin of the piped agent, which can free the limit of what platform PipeCD could support as a CD system.
```

As at this point, we have migration plan for platform related concepts in configuration as below

For platform provider

Instead of Platform Provider, we plan to introduce the config for the plugin and define deployTargets.

```yaml
apiVersion: pipecd.dev/v1beta1
kind: Piped
spec:
...
  plugin:
    - name: k8s_plugin
      port: 8081
      deployTargets:
        - name: dev
          labels: 
            env: dev
          config: # depends on plugins
            masterURL: http://cluster-dev
            kubeConfigPath: ./kubeconfig-dev
```

For kind

Instead of Kind, we plan to introduce the label to represent the application kind.

```yaml
apiVersion: pipecd.dev/v1beta1
kind: Application
metadata:
  labels:
    kind: KUBERNETES # <- like this
spec:
  name: myApp
```

The control plane will be updated so that it can accept platform provider from pipedv0 and deployTargets from pipedv1.

### The protocol

The protocol means to protocol used to connect between piped and its plugins.

> As at the starting point, we have 2 options

Reviewer: [nit] 
```suggestion
As at the starting point, we had 2 options
```

- WASM
- gRPC

For less study maintaining cost, we choose gRPC. Also, other components connections in PipeCD system used gRPC as well.

![](assets/0015-piped-protocol.png)

Boostrap flow:
- Start piped (as entrypoint of piped pod container for example)
- Piped loads plugins' configuration

> - Piped pull plugins from registry (if it's remote URI specified)

Author: Updated 👍

- Fetch and build the state of the live manifest
- Insight feature

Across these features, we have to support 5 kinds of platforms (up to now), and each deployment we have serveral kind of stages, which are

- K8s stages
- Cloud run stages
- Terraform stages
- ECS stages
- Lambda stages
- Wait stage
- Wait approval stage
- Analysis stage
- Script run stage
- Custom sync stage (deprecated)

Based on the requirement, we would create plugins based on 3 big interfaces

- Deployment interface: response to how deployment should be done (include: plan, execute deployment tasks)
- LiveState interface: response to fetch and build state of live manifest
- Drift interface: response to calculate the drift between 2 given manifests (live - git or running - target)

Plugin can choose how and which interface it implement such as

- K8s plugin can implement all 3 interfaces
- Wait approval plugin can implement only Deployment interface (since it has nothing to deal with livestate and drift features)

Also, we may need support interface which implemented in piped side (optional) for tasks such as: Decrypt piped secret.

### The running flow

# Unresolved questions

> 

Reviewer: [ASK]  (TBD?)

How to upgrade plugin versions?

I think users need to update a Piped config, push it to remote, and re-deploy Piped, right?

What about launcher?

Author: Yeh, there are a lot of unresolved questions across multiple areas. I think we can make separate RFCs for each of those, like Boostrap piped/plugins, logging between piped/plugins, creating new plugins flow, etc. Wdyt?

Reviewer: Thank you I got it, I agree with it

> 

Reviewer: How about adding "how to manage plugin libraries"?

There are some funcs used across plugins.
e.g. diff, launching a grpc server(?)
